**The impact of environmental exposures on the epigenomic and transcriptomic landscape of transposable elements**

Transposable elements (TEs) are mobile DNA sequences that constitute a significant portion of mammalian genomes. While typically silenced by epigenetic mechanisms, mounting evidence indicates TEs can regulate gene expression and chromatin architecture. However, their regulatory roles under various environmental exposures remain largely unexplored. In this study, we investigate the regulatory functions of TEs in mouse liver tissue following early-life exposure to environmental toxicants, including arsenic (As), lead (Pb), bisphenol A (BPA), tributyltin (TBT), di-2-ethylhexyl phthalate (DEHP), tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), and particulate matter less than 2.5 micrometers (PM2.5). These toxicants are linked to various health issues, including neurodevelopmental deficits, metabolic and immune dysfunction, and increased cancer risk. Integrative analysis of 351 multi-omic datasets from liver tissues of 5-month-old mice indicated that early-life environmental exposures significantly altered chromatin accessibility and expression of TEs in later life, revealing distinct exposure-specific signatures and sex-dependent responses. 6,699 TEs were identified with altered chromatin accessibility, mostly in non-coding regions, within these TEs, long interspersed nuclear elements (LINEs) associated genes involved in metabolic pathways were enriched, while long terminal repeat (LTR) elements, particularly the ORR1E subfamily, were predominantly associated with immune-related genes. Additionally, we identified 140 TE-gene chimeric transcripts with TE-derived novel transcription start sites, highlighting TE-contributed transcriptional plasticity. Our findings depict a comprehensive landscape of TE response to early-life toxicant exposures, offering insights into TEs biology and their impact on health and disease. 

This repository contains custom R scripts used for downstream analysis and visualization in the manuscript.

The scripts are not intended as standalone software. They are provided to document the analysis workflow and support reproducibility.
